Expiration algorithm design document (#631)
earth-mover/icechunk: design-docs/007-basic-expiration.md

# Basic expiration algorithm

## What are _expiration_ and _garbage collection_

Icechunk keeps exhaustive track of history. Currently every snapshot ever written is available
in object store and never deleted. Many times, that is not what users want. Our experience with
Arraylake has taught us that 
users usually want to keep "some history" but not all of it. The reason is:
wasted storage. If they never go back to check previous versions, why would they want to pay

> for the extra storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the extra storage?
```

Author: done

There are many ways to select what versions (snapshots) should be kept
around and which ones should be deleted. In our experience, a good balance of

> simplicity and power is: _Expire snapshots older than certain threshold_.

Reviewer 2: should mention that tags are special and kept around?

Author: done

> The expiration process has two stages: history edition (aka expiration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expiration process has two stages: history rewriting (aka expiration)
```

Author: done

and garbage collection.

> During history edition, references and snapshots can be edited and added

Reviewer 2: What does "references" mean here? The manifest files?

Author: done

> During history edition, references and snapshots can be edited and added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During history rewriting, references and snapshots can be edited and added
```

Author: done

in a way that generates a different view of the history of the repository.
During this process no objects are deleted. Some may be edited, but in a
non destructive way.

Garbage collection is the process by which objects that are no longer needed

> get deleted, freeing storage space. In our case, we declare that the object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
get deleted, freeing storage space. In our case, we declare that the objects
```

Author: done

that are no longer needed are those that cannot be reached from any tags or branches.
In this sense, tags and branches are what keep snapshots alive by pointing at them.

> In this way, if history edition generates unreachable snapshots, then garbage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this way, if history rewriting generates unreachable snapshots, then garbage
```

Author: done

collection can free them. Importantly, once a snapshot becomes unreachable,
its exclusive manifests and its exclusive chunks are also unreachable. This
is where the storage savings actually happen, by deleting chunks that were
overwritten (or flagged as deleted) in later versions of the repository.

Keeping history is still very useful: it provides the infrastructure for
transactions, it allows users to undo mistakes, improves auditability, and,
in certain cases, it's a core feature users need (example: insurance industry).

## The simpler problem of snapshot removal

To understand how to expire old snapshots, we first need to understand

> how we can abandon a series of arbitrary snapshots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how we can abandon a series of arbitrary snapshots.
By "abandon," we mean, give up the ability to check out those snapshots.
```

Author: done

> We present a diagram of a repository snapshots. Arrows follow the `parent`
> relationship. Above in the diagram is the original repo, and below, we show

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We present a diagram of a repository snapshots. Arrows point FROM `parent`
TO `child`. Above in the diagram is the original repo, and below, we show
```

Author: done

two possible ways to abandon snapshots `X1, X2, ..., Xn`

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
  direction TB
  state Original {

    state "X1, X2, ..., Xn" as X
    state "..." as REST

    [*] --> N1
    N1 --> N2
    N2 --> A
    A --> X
    X --> B
    B --> REST
    
  }

  Original --> Skip
  Original --> EditParents

  state "Update A in place" as Skip {

    state "N1" as N1E
    state "N2" as N2E
    state "A (updated)" as AE
    state "B" as BE
    state "X1, X2, ..., Xn" as XE
    state "..." as RESTE   %% codespell:ignore

    [*] --> N1E
    N1E --> N2E
    N2E --> AE
    AE --> BE
    XE --> BE

>     BE --> RESTE    %% codespell:ignore

Reviewer 2: What is `RESTE` and `RESTP` (below)

Author: I need to give the nodes a different name for the graph to work ... basically a whole other series of commits. Will add the explanation.

Author: Ahh I see, the label is wrong. Thank you.

Author: done

  }

  state "New A" as EditParents {
    state "N1'" as N1P
    state "N2'" as N2P
    state "A'" as AP
    state "N1" as N1POLD
    state "N2" as N2POLD
    state "A" as APOLD
    state "B"  as BP
    state "X1, X2, ..., Xn" as XP
    state "..." as RESTP     %% codespell:ignore

    [*] --> N1P
    N1POLD --> N2POLD
    N2POLD --> APOLD
    APOLD --> XP
    XP --> BP
    N1P --> N2P
    N2P --> AP
    AP --> BP
    BP --> RESTP   %% codespell:ignore
  }
```
In this diagram we want

> to abandon a stream of contiguous snapshots `X1, X2,..., Xn` that seats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to abandon a stream of contiguous snapshots `X1, X2,..., Xn` that sits
```

Author: done

in the middle of some branch's history.

There are many ways in which this could be achieved. We display in the
diagram and explain below, the two we think deserve more analysis.

### Left algorithm: Update `A` in place

On the alternative displayed on the left of the diagram, we first find
snapshot `A`. It is found by traversing the commits from the
branch/tag pointer, using the `parent` relationship, and stopping
right before the first snapshot we want to abandon.

Once we have found `A` we can update its contents in place, maintaining its `SnapshotId`,
so, maintaining its path in object store. The update we do is
changing its ancestry, keeping all ancestors except the set

> `{X1, X2, ..., Xn}`. In this form, `A`'s direct parent becomes `B`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`{X1, X2, ..., Xn}`. In this form, `A`'s direct parent becomes `B`.
This operation is conceptually similar to a a git "squash commits" operation.
```

Author: done

No other changes are needed. Snapshots `X1, X2,..., Xn` remain on
disk, they are just no longer accessible from the starting branch/tag.

> ### Right algorithm: New `A`

Reviewer 2: why not combine both? create `N1 -> N2 -> A' -> B'` so a new A' is created but parents are unaffected, only descendants are rewritten -- this is squash-rebase in git. that way any references to `N1` are preserves (e.g. a deployed app).

Author: If I modify `A` to an `A'` I need to modify `N2` because it has to point to its parent `A'`, then `N1`, etc

If a user is reading a snapshot being rewritten by the left algorithm,
they could either get the history version before or after the operation,
but never an invalid view of history or an invalid snapshot. Object stores
guarantee atomic updates to individual objects, and they also guarantee
strong read-after-update consistency (with some region caveats in the case of
Tigris).

For the right algorithm case, the "race condition" is produced when the
branch is updated, but again, this is safe and atomic.

Any operations that may require multiple passes through the repository
history, will suffer inconsistencies if expiration is running concurrently.
They can get different views of the history in each pass.
But that's true for any algorithm that modifies
history. Users will need to implement their own consistency mechanisms
for this operations, and to avoid multiple expiration operations
happening at once. Expiration is considered an administrative operation,
and in general avoided during repository usage.

We choose to implement the algorithm on the left: "Update A in place" for its
simplicity. We don't think the alternative has enough advantages to justify

> its shortcomings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its shortcomings.
We accept the tradeoff that we will have to rewrite metadata files in place.
```

Author: done

## Using this algorithm for snapshot expiration

Now that we know how to abandon snapshots, we can expire snapshots based
on age. Here is a rough pseudo-code overview of the algorithm:

```python
for ref in repo.tags + repo.branches:
    snapshot_id = resolve_ref(ref)
    snapshot = fetch_snapshot(snapshot_id)

>     # we do nothing if the ref points to a branch that is fully expired already

Author: done

    if snapshot.timestamp < TIME_THRESHOLD:
        continue

    # find the root of the tree
    # this is B in our algorithm, the root
    root = next(for parent in snapshot.ancestry if parent.parent is None)

    # find the last non-expired snapshot
    # this is A in our algorithm
    editable = last(for parent in snapshot.ancestry if parent.timestamp >= TIME_THRESHOLD)
    editable.parent = root
    write_snapshot(editable)
```

This process can be executed with branches and tags in any order. In the end,
the expired snapshots will be left with either, no branches/tags pointing to them,
or with branches or tags pointed directly to them, with no intermediate non-expired snapshots
such as `N1` and `N2`.

This end state is the ideal one for the garbage collection algorithm to start.
Non-pointed snapshots will be deleted, together with their exclusive manifests
and chunks. Branches or tags pointing directly to expired snapshots can be
deleted too, which will generate extra garbage GC can clean.

### Sample run of the algorithm:

> 

Reviewer: Before going to this intricate, complicated example, it might be nice to see a much simpler scenario with a single branch and a linear history, where we just want to expire everything older than a certain timedelta.

> **Imagine the following history tree**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Imagine the following history tree** `X` marks snapshots that are to be expired.
```

Author: oh great, i forgot to mention this

Author: done

    commit id: "10"
    commit id: "11"

    checkout main
    branch test
    commit id: "9"

    checkout main
    branch qa
    commit id: "8"

    checkout main
    branch dangling-qa
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "1"
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "2"

    branch dangling-main
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "4"
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "5" tag: "tag2"
    checkout dangling-qa

    commit type: REVERSE  tag: "ta2" id: "3"
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "6"
    commit  type: REVERSE id: "7"

    checkout main
    commit  id: "12"
    commit  id: "13"
    commit  id: "14"
```

Now snapshots `6` and `7` are dangling. They are ready to be garbage collected
when GC runs. Snapshots `1` to `5` are still pointed by tags, but those
tags are candidates for delete.

When the algorithm processes tags `tag1` and `tag2` nothing new happens, because
they already point to expired snapshots.

The final result of the algorithm is a tree with a much wider shape. Garbage
collection can already free two snapshots, and 5 more would be deleted if
we delete the "expired tags". This process of deleting tags that are pointing to
expired snapshots, could be optional part of the expiration process.

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to add a section explicitly saying what sort of expiration is allowed / not allowed. For example
```suggestion
## Forbidden Expiration Operations

- Expiring any snapshot that is directly pointed by a branch
- Expiring any snapshot that is directly pointed by a tag

```

Anything else?

Author: done

## On timestamps

There is a causality relationship between a snapshot and its parent: We know
the parent was always written before the child, because it includes its id.
But:

> * How do we enforce monotonicity of snapshot timestamps?

Reviewer: How important is this causality really?

It seems to me that we only really have to know _the first snapshot to expire_ in a particular ancestry tree. After that, we can just traverse the ancestry, rather than explicitly comparing timestamps for each snapshot.

Author: Yes, it's just that the algorithm implementation is easier if we can assume every other ancestor is expired once we find the first expired snapshot. If there is clock drift, this could be no longer true.

* what should we use as the timestamp for a snapshot in the expiration process?

Snapshots store the timestamp at which they were created, but, this time
comes from the user's clock. Clocks do drift.

A better source of time would be the metadata in the object store, we could
use `Last Updated At` for this, but:

* It's hard to implement well, we only get the timestamp after writing or retrieving the object.
* It would break when we update the snapshot in place, because that also updates the timestamp.

Here is one approach we could use:

> * Enforce monotonicity: don't let a snapshot be written unless its timestamp is larger than the

Reviewer 2: :+1:
